---
categories: [tech]
aliases: ["/2010/06/29/linux-kerberos-ad/"]
title: Kerberos authenticated queries to Active Directory
date: "2010-06-29"
tags:
  - ldap
  - active_directory
  - kerberos
---

There are many guides out there to help you configure your Linux system as an LDAP and Kerberos client to an Active Directory server. Most of these guides solve the problem of authentication by embedding a username and password into a configuration file somewhere on your system. While this works, it presents some problems:

-   If you use a common account for authentication from all of your Linux systems, a compromise on one system means updating the configuration of all of your systems.
-   If you don't want to use a common account, you need to provision a new account for each computer...
-   ...which is silly, because if you join the system to Active Directory there is already a computer object associated with the system that can be used for authentication.

This document describes how to configure a Linux system such that queries
generated by [nss_ldap][1] will use either the current user's Kerberos
credentials, or, for the root user, credentials stored in a Kerberos
credentials cache.

-   Your Linux system must have a valid `keytab` file.
    
    A `keytab` is a file containing pairs of Kerberos principals and encrypted keys.
    
    Joining Active Directory using Samba's `net ads join` will create the
    necessary keytab. It is also possible to create the keytab on your Windows
    domain controller and install it on your Linux systems. Instructions for
    doing this are beyond the scope of this document.

-   Host objects in Active Directory must have a `userPrincipalName` attribute.
    
    For example:
    
        $ ldapsearch cn=dottiness userPrincipalName
        dn: CN=DOTTINESS,CN=Computers,dc=example,dc=com
        userPrincipalName: host/dottiness.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM
        
    Active Directory *does not* automatically create a `userPrincipalName` when a new host object is provisioned. You will either need to provide this value manually or develop an automated process that will populate this field when provisioning new host objects.

Kerberos credentials have a maximum usable lifetime. The cached credentials
used for root queries by `nss_ldap` must be refreshed periodically in order to
function.

You will need to install a crontab (e.g., in `/etc/cron.d`) that looks something
like this:

    PATH=/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/kerberos/bin
    @reboot root kinit -k -c /var/run/ldap_cc > /dev/null 2>&1
    @hourly root kinit -k -c /var/run/ldap_cc > /dev/null 2>&1
    
This periodically reauthenticates to your domain controller used the cached
principal in the system keytab (`/etc/krb5.keytab`) and caches the credentials in
`/var/run/ldap_cc`.

You will need something similar to the following in `/etc/ldap.conf`:

    # This is your domain controller.
    uri ldap://dc1.example.com
    base dc=example,dc=com
    scope one
    referrals no
    timelimit 120
    bind_timelimit 120
    idle_timelimit 3600
    ldap_version 3
    
    # Authenticate using SASL for user and root queries.
    use_sasl on
    rootuse_sasl on
    
    # Use SASL's gssapi (Kerberos) mechanism.
    sasl_mech gssapi
    
    # Use these cached credentials for root.
    krb5_ccname /var/run/ldap_cc
    
    nss_base_group ou=groups,dc=example,dc=com
    nss_base_passwd ou=people,dc=example,dc=com
    nss_initgroups_ignoreusers root,ldap,named,avahi,haldaemon,dbus,radvd,tomcat,radiusd,news,mailman,nscd,gdm,polkituser
    
    # These are common mappings for working with Active Directory.
    nss_map_attribute uid sAMAccountName
    nss_map_attribute uniqueMember member
    nss_map_objectclass posixAccount user
    nss_map_objectclass posixGroup group
    nss_map_objectclass shadowAccount user
    
    pam_login_attribute sAMAccountName
    pam_member_attribute member
    pam_password ad
    pam_password_prohibit_message Please visit http://password.example.com to change your password.
    
    pam_filter objectclass=User
    

The `use_sasl on` directive configures `nss_ldap` to use the Kerberos credentials
for the current user when looking up user/group/etc information. The
`rootuse_sasl on` attribute does the same thing for processes running as `root`.

Note that this configuration sets scope `one`, which means that `nss_ldap` *will
not* recurse down a directory tree. This is a performance optimization, not a
requirement.

## As an unprivileged user

Before acquiring Kerberos credentials:

    $ getent passwd lars
    (times out)
    
Authenticate to Kerberos:

    $ kinit
    Password for lars@EXAMPLE.COM:
    
With valid credentials:

    $ getent passwd lars
    lars:*:500:500:lars:\\emc00.example.com\staff\l\lars\windows:
    
## As root

Before acquiring Kerberos credentials:

    # getent passwd lars
    (times out)
    
Update credentials cache from system keytab:

    # kinit -k
    
With valid credentials:

    # getent passwd lars
    lars:*:500:500:lars:\\emc00.example.com\staff\l\lars\windows:
    
This configuration makes the operation of `nss_ldap` dependent on valid Kerberos
credentials. If a user remains logged in after her Kerberos credentials have
expired, she will experience degraded behavior, since many name lookup
operations will timeout. Similarly, local system accounts that do not have
valid Kerberos credentials will experience similar behavior (and will thus only
be able to see local users and groups).

<!--
An alternate solution to this problem would run a local LDAP proxy that (a)
uses the system keytab to authenticate to AD, and (b) allows anonymous LDAP
queries from localhost. I will discuss this configuration in a future post.
-->

[1]: http://www.padl.com/OSS/nss_ldap.html  

